Understanding the evolution of
FinTech both its
present and its future,
necessarily requires
mentioning the idea
of choice architecture
and the challenge that
consumers or purchases
a FinTech products and
services might have in
selecting their purchases.
For example, in a robo
advisory contexts selecting
elements within a portfolio.
One of the solutions that
have been offered again in
the robo advisory space are
pre-selected portfolios.
Where do those come from?
Why do they have three
choices versus 30 choices?
Well, choice architecture
and the challenge of
computation burdens
when the number of
choices is large becomes
really important.
Again, FinTech has
its own challenges
both with a number of
possibilities out there,
how many apps on
the App Store related to
FinTech at this
point as an example,
but also the underlying
number of choices
within the palette of potentials.
Well, complexity matters when
numerous choices are available.
Research over many years
has suggested that showing
"Too much information Can
affect the way
the choices are made.
It can skew risk perceptions.
It can slow or make
impossible decisions
and decision-making.
It can also impact
the way people feel
about their decisions and make
them less happy about it."
For example, Diacon and
Hasseldine a couple years ago,
found that investors
are more likely to
take risk when shown
presentations over longer
periods than when presented
with succession of
short period returns.
In other words, one single
longer-term representation
of results, allowed clients
or investors to make
decisions more easily than
a large number of
shorter period returns.
Other studies have suggested
that when faced
with many choices,
investors choose
not to participate.
In a famous study
of 401(k) defined
contribution plans over a large
number of participants,
almost a million participants,
across 660 companies,
the number of
choices as they increased
caused decision or
decision-making paralysis,
we call it analysis paralysis.
For every increase
in options by 10,
overall participation
in retirement plans
themselves declined
by two percent.
Framing decision-making thus
turns out to be important.
In addition, complexity
interacts with trust.
First, not having an answer
leads to declining
trust and second,
when the client asks
a question involving
a complex scenario,
a product service and so on,
if an advisor did
not know an answer,
it was better than
making up an answer.
In well-known study, Bickart and
co-authors conducted
a series of studies
in which participants rated
advisors on two scores,
trustworthiness and
intention to make
an investment decision
with the advisor per se,
after being presented with
three answers from the advisor.
One, absolutely
correct and simple.
Two, admitting
ignorance and three,
an answer that didn't sound
right and appeared obfuscatory.
What they found was that it's
always better for
an adviser to admit
ignorance than obfuscate
whether the client
perceives the adviser
earning a commission.
Here are the results of
the study relating complexity
and clarity to trust and
attention to invest.
This is essentially
a two-by-two matrix
with commission motors on
the left and no commission
motive on the right.
In other words, fee-only
versus commission,
and then participants who
understood there's
a commission versus
participant who said
the salesperson
knew all the answers.
Down at the bottom, we
see intention to invest,
subsequent to the interaction,
and an overall rating of trust.
Both of these scales range
from one to seven with seven
being greater in trust
or intention than one.
Let's focus on the bottom
in the highlighted box.
When there was no commission
involved and of course,
we know that in the FinTech
space we have fee-only
in commission oriented
platforms companies.
When a correct answer
was provided, clear,
and simple 4.91 average
rating on the trust scale
was observed,
and a 4.5 rating on
intention to invest.
Note that when a commission was
involved the 4.9 percent average
dropped to 4.61 and the intention
to invest drop from 4.5 to 4.3,
both of which were
statistically significant.
Then, when we move from
the correct answer simply
expressed to a obfuscatory,
in other words, an unclear
possibly wrong response,
the trust levels once
again dropped
dramatically especially,
when a commission was involved.
Four point nine one on
the trust scale moved
to 4.34 and then
4.34 move to 3.66 on
the trust perception scale when
a commission was perceived.
To say it another way,
an obfuscatory response brought
trust perceptions down
and interacted with
the commission motive
in a misalignment of
incentives on behalf of
the adviser as perceived
by the client.
In addition, the attention
to invest went down from
4.5 to 4.36 and then from 4.36
to 3.56 was simply saying,
"I don't know better."
Absolutely. Again, think
about trust perceptions.
They went from, on the right in
the no commission case
from 4.9 to
4.8 and then in
the commission case,
the don't know response
went from 4.8 to 4.42.
In both cases better than
making up a response.
To summarize,
intentions to invest,
perceptions of trust interact
with commissions and
misalign of incentives as
well as how responses happen.
In the FinTech space,
having unclear actions
and unclear responses,
as well as a
heightened sensitivity
to algorithms and potential
mistrust and algorithms,
come together both to represent
a tailwind and a headwind
for the industry.
So at the end of the day,
what can we say
about what we know
about the FinTech space generally
and in particular
about robo advising.
Well, first it's here to stay
and it's part of the way
the world will work it seems
ineluctable judging from
both supply and demand.
The increasing in size
and number of deals.
The upward general trend
despite some market
cycle variation.
The global nature of
the industry as well
as how it's construed
across sub-components.
All tell us that FinTech as
part and parcel of the world
in the way forward.
In addition, millennials matter
in the heart and minds of
millennials which seemed to
be so much in the cross heirs of
financial services firms
already legacy firms as well as
disruptors and
entrepreneurial enterprises,
underscore the avenue
both the supply
and the demand of
FinTech providers.
However, the traditional
notions of trust not
just in the financial
industry but
specifically in what is
special about FinTech,
algorithms and potential exposure
to technology all come together.
Traditional
challenging areas like
those of choice
architecture arise.
It's going to be nothing
different for FinTech.
Successful FinTech
entrepreneurs, investors,
and clients will resolve some of
these challenges and
harness the tailwinds while
confronting both
the classical and
the new headwinds that
are facing the industry.
Almost surely, there will
be winners and losers.
Those that win will
accommodate and treat
these challenges and
they'll harness some
of them for the future